There really aren't that many novels written about the Armenian genocide, are there?
It's not that I can think of.
And it's quite a small American ethnic group, I guess.
I'm of Greek descent myself, so we don't have a large, huge community.
Tell me a little bit about how this novel came to be, I guess.
Why don't we start generally?
Well, let me just say first that...
The book tells the story of the Armenian Genocide as witnessed by the grandmother.
The book is about three generations in an Armenian family.
I don't really see the book as about the Armenian Genocide so much as taking how the Armenian Genocide affected three generations in a family.
Well, it is about it then, I think.
Right, right.
but I think there's a perception that the entire book covers the Armenian genocide.
Do you know what I'm saying?
Yes.
I don't have that perception.
Do you think there is a perception?
I think that in some of the ways the book's been talked about, the genocide is what has been talked about.
And for me as a writer, what interested me was here is this act.
this historical act that has really gone unrecognized, and how does the fact of the genocide and also the fact that it's been unrecognized, how has that affected a particular family, three generations of this family, that so far have been unable to heal the wounds of the genocide?
As a newspaper man, I can certainly, as one who spent many years as a journalist, I can certainly see, however, where there would be interest in that angle.
Oh, sure, sure.
You know, the fact that it is a lesser-known genocide.
Right.
And I'm glad for that.
I'm glad that the genocide is being talked about.
I mean, do you think that it perhaps has been ignored?
Oh, absolutely.
In part, because the Turks, to this day, refuse to acknowledge that the event ever happened, despite all the firsthand accounts and the extensive documentation in the Library of Congress and our National Archives and throughout the world.
And circumstances have been such where, unlike the Germans, they have not had to
be held accountable in any kind of world forum, I guess.
That's right.
Well, to paraphrase the women in the novel, for the Armenians, there was no Nuremberg.
Exactly.
And, of course, it speaks for any number of other unspeakable genocides of the century, doesn't it?
That's right.
The one that's going on right now, I guess.
Tell me a little bit about yourself and, of course, this is your first novel.
Right.
So one can assume by your surname and also by the material that you write about that there is a lot of autobiographical material here.
Yeah.
Not really.
Yes, I'm half Armenian.
My father's Armenian, obviously.
But as a writer, I feel...
most free when the characters are fully invented.
And this story and these characters are fully invented.
They're not from my life.
Where my life intersects the book is that certainly because of my background, the Armenian Genocide is of great interest.
But also I think the book raises universal questions.
The narrator's mission in the book, or quest, is that she is pregnant and is asking the question, what is she going to pass on to the next generation?
And while the Armenian Genocide is extreme, every family has its ghosts.
This family's ghosts happen to be, like I said, extreme.
So to answer the autobiographical question, it's not really an autobiographical book.
I know that that's assumed because it's in the first person and it's a
And, of course, the obvious, I suppose.
All right, so it's not autobiographical in a specific sense, but for the material, clearly had to come from, I mean, did you talk to relatives?
I read a lot.
I did a lot of research.
Let me go back to your first question, where the book came from for me.
It came from really two places.
One when I was in 1979.
I was a Senate page in Washington, and I had to write a research paper, and I chose to write the paper on the Armenian Genocide, particularly since I was down in Washington and could really explore the National Archives and all the information in the Library of Congress.
And that was the first time in my life that I really understood or began to understand the scope of the genocide.
And I wrote the paper and I went on with my life and didn't realize how much suicide affected me.
And it was years later when I was 20 and was taking a junior year abroad that I had
I actually had a dream one night in which this old woman came to me almost like a visitation.
And, you know, as a writer, you'll take inspiration from anybody.
Sure.
And when I awoke, I began writing this old story.
I thought it was a short story, but obviously it became a much larger project.
But that woman was Cassard.
So the book really began, for me, with Cassard.
Okay.
I'm just looking at some background material.
So you're a Connecticut woman, I guess?
Yeah.
And I'm just...
It's awfully hard to ask you about the novel itself because the novel does, I mean, we should take the novel on its own merits, of course, as you would wish, I'm sure.
I have to say the interviews with novelists are the most difficult because you're trying to get the background.
Can I say a couple other things?
Please, go ahead.
I know, you know, okay, we've talked about the genocide.
Some of the questions that, or for me, what the book is about is that in every family, no matter how broken or wounded, people yearn to be understood.
And in this particular family, Kassar, the grandmother, has survived this horrific event and refuses to talk about it.
So there is never any healing in the family.
that those wounds, the shame and the anger, gets passed on to her daughter and to her daughter.
And it is set as a job to heal the family.
And one of the things I think the book really goes into is sort of the forbidden territory, the unspoken bond between mothers and daughters, and those things that are taboo within families.
sexuality.
And I can talk about a scene in the book.
I don't know how... Are you doing more of a profile on me?
Yeah, well, it develops, okay?
It's kind of... It's really a book-related feature type thing.
And the profile material is important, but it will be absolutely related to the book.
I mean, I wouldn't be talking a different word for the book.
But now tell me where you... Have you always been...
motivated to write or was it this novel?
Now you mentioned you were a Senate page in 1979.
Were you looking forward to a career in government or whatever?
No, I've always written.
I was the kid, the eight-year-old kid writing poems at night under the covers with the flashlight.
And I had my first story.
I won a writing contest when I was 11.
And I've always written.
And I think in part because I love language and I love story and also I'm a hungry reader.
And I yearn for books that will move me.
And will engage all my senses.
So I think I write as much so that I can read as anything else.
When did this novel start to... Well, I began the book when I was 20.
And I worked on it essentially for 10 years.
Once I got out of Stanford, I began the book...
Were you in a writing project out there?
No?
Right.
I began the book as a short story, and then in my senior year at Stanford, I wrote a novella as an honors thesis that was sort of the seed of the book.
And then after I graduated, I worked as a copywriter.
Where was this?
Yeah.
For Ketchum Communications for the first year, and then I left Ketchum and was a freelancer for nine years.
This is on the West Coast or?
San Francisco.
Okay.
And so there was always the strain of working full time and also writing those late nights.
And so this, so the novella which you did, again, is that part of this?
It's not, you can't see it in the book, but it was the same characters and the same story.
At what point did you decide to make it a generational kind of a thing?
From the beginning.
Even when it was a short story?
Even when it was a short story.
That's kind of hard, isn't it, for a story?
Yeah, it was.
That's why it wasn't, it was never a finished short story.
I began writing Cassart's story, but the question for me is, what would this survivor of the genocide pass on?
And how would the genocide not only affect her, but affect the successive generations and her family?
And that, for me, is the seed of the book.
At what point did you start to really get a voice, I mean a voice for the narrator?
Well, that's the thing, Nick, that was so different for me.
Cassard really came to me as a fully realized character.
She did?
Yeah.
You can see her?
Oh, yeah.
Actually hear her voice, you know what it sounds like?
It really, you know, I heard her voice and for... I spent a couple months just writing her voice and writing her story through her voice.
And for me, my characters come to me.
They come to me through their voices or they come to me in images.
And it's a process of discovery to sort of see where...
not only what their actions are, but to then add the insight to understand why they do what they do.
So the voice and the character came first, right?
Right.
But clearly you had to develop a story as well.
Tell me how that began to emerge.
Well, I think it's through a lot of, for me, it's a process of patient listening.
to the things that are said, and especially to the things that are unsaid.
In this family and with Cassard, so much is unsaid.
And the things that are unsaid are in some ways the most potent and the most wounding.
You know, the most loaded.
And it's then my job as a writer to put that on the page and
and to strip away anything that is excessive so that the reader really feels the power behind what these characters say and do.
Are you working on another novel?
I am.
I can't really talk about it.
Okay, but... Yeah, it's still in that... No, I understand that.
I don't want you to, but does it follow in the same... No, very different.
Very different story.
Very different characters.
I mean, so the Armenian-American experience has probably been expressed in this novel.
I think so.
Although there's a part of me that wonders if...
10 years or so, I won't go back and find out what Seta's doing.
I think at the end of the book, she's really just beginning her life.
You see, are you concerned about, on the one hand, you say you don't want this to be perceived as a book about the genocide per se.
I mean, you use that certainly as the premise with which you develop your characters in your story.
But on the other hand, I think that it's almost unavoidable that you be identified as an Iranian.
Oh, absolutely.
And I don't mean that I don't want the book to be identified as related to an Iranian genocide.
I'm glad for that.
I don't want it to be simplified so that it's only about them.
It would make one believe it's a historical novel about the genocide.
And for me, the book is about the complexities that occur in this family.
In your view, is it decidedly an American novel?
Well, I think it is an American novel.
I think so, too, but I would like you to address yourself to it.
Yeah, right.
And I think it's an American story.
You know...
As I said before, every family has its ghost.
These ghosts are extreme, but I think in every family there are stories that get passed on.
It's also an American story in the sense that in Cassard's generation, people were defined by their community and their family.
Seta's generation, the third generation, the family has broken apart.
The community no longer exists.
And so the burden is on the individual to define herself.
And in that sense, I think the book is really a story, a search for identity.
Now, you said that you were working on this for 10 years?
Yes.
I suspect that this was done without a contractor.
Is that right?
Right, right.
No, I sent it to my agent.
I mean, you had an agent at that point, which is great, too.
I mean, that's one of the hardest things in publishing.
Well, I'll tell you what, let me tell you briefly.
In 86, I went to a writer's conference, and my work was shown to an editor, Tom Jenks.
I know Tom, yeah.
Yeah, well, he's now my husband.
You're kidding.
No.
I interviewed him.
I did a piece on him years ago when he did the Hemingway.
And in fact, I sent him, he'll remember me because this is cute.
I sent him a copy of the book and asked him to inscribe it.
And he inscribed it.
upside down on the back.
He did.
And then he noticed it, and then he did it again on the front, which really makes it a unique one.
I'm thrilled to have it.
He should remember that.
Oh, he will.
I'll have to remind him.
Oh, that's great.
Yeah.
Is Tom still editing now, might I ask?
He is, and he's also writing.
He's left full-time editing.
Uh-huh.
Well, he got out of Scribner's at the right time.
I got out of Scribner's and went to GQ, where he was the literary editor, and he did that just because that was more of a part-time thing.
He could work on his own fiction, and he's living in San Francisco and teaching and editing, but mostly doing his own writing.
He had a book come out in 91 called Our Happiness, a Novel, and he did that work on a second.
Well, that's great.
Yeah.
Oh, I'll have to.
That's wonderful.
Please.
I just sold my own book, I might say, to Henry Holt.
Oh, congratulations.
Thank you.
But it's not fiction.
It's nonfiction.
It's about bibliomania, book madness.
Oh.
People who love books always give me that response.
It was a tough sell because the suspicion is only people who are bonkers over books will be interested in this.
I'd love to see it, but then I'm bonkers.
Well, I think it'll do just fine.
I had a huge... I'm sorry, go ahead.
it'll be out in about a year early spring next year if in fact it was once under contract to random house we didn't have to get it i was orphaned last year at random house when my editor left and went to another house and uh and i kind of went out in that same purge that that that uh joanie evans was uh awesome but you know you make out better in the long run
I got Alan Peacock at Holt, and he's a wonderful editor, and he loves the book, and that means a lot.
But who's your editor?
Kate Medina.
What I was going to say was that when, you know, it was always such a struggle to work this book.
I had an image of the book when I first started writing it, a finished manuscript.
that I would have to reach to write this book.
And, you know, all these years of trying to finish it.
And I really didn't want the external pressure of publishing and agents and all of that.
And didn't have it anyway.
But when I had been introduced by Tom,
to Amanda Urban.
This was long before Tom and I were involved.
Actually, it's a longer story.
That's okay.
Well, give me what I can use.
In 86...
Amanda Urban heard about my work.
Well, that's great.
She's a wonderful agent.
She is wonderful.
And she called me.
And I sent her 50 pages.
And she said, great, when will the book be done?
And I said, oh, six months.
And six months turned into six years.
And I didn't contact her until the book was done.
She stuck with you all that time?
Well, let me tell you what happened.
I put the book, you know, the finished manuscript in a box and a cover letter on top saying, you know, I hope you remember me.
This is now like 92.
This is 92.
October of 92.
And...
sent it off, hoping.
And she called about four days later or five days later.
She'd just gotten the manuscript the night before and called and said she'd stayed up most of the night reading it and was thrilled.
That's great.
And then things happened very quickly.
On election day, the day Clinton got elected, she sent the book to several editors and told me, you know, it's going to be a couple weeks.
It's a long book.
you know, before we hear anything.
And two days later, Kate Medina bought the book.
Gee, that's wonderful.
No, I mean, really, this is, I know a little bit about publishing.
This is a pretty, pretty quick.
Yeah.
And if you sold the thing in October of 92, I mean, they did get you right out.
And, you know, I suppose they could have gotten you out for fall of 93, but that would have been a rush.
And who needs it?
They did it very nicely.
I think it's a good spring book for a first novel, too.
Thank you.
Well, it's just been, it's, it's, it's just, I, I,
I'm just so pleased.
You know, after 10 slow years writing alone in my room, it's just a great... Was this written on a word processor?
Longhand and off the computer.
Sometimes I draft in longhand to get the rhythm.
How many drafts is it beyond?
Oh, so many.
When did you feel you were done?
When did I?
Yeah.
When I sent it to Binky in October.
Uh-huh.
I finished the writing of the book.
at the end of 1990, and then I spent almost two years editing.
Did Duck Tom help you at all?
Yes.
I mean, that's great to have an editor of his stature and the family to look at it.
He sure is.
He's my first and best reader.
I'll bet.
And did he make any substantive suggestions to you?
At a certain point, you know, once I'd finished the draft, he...
He went through it with me.
And, you know, at a certain point, every writer needs that other eye, you know, that completely objective eye.
And he was just great.
That's wonderful.
Yeah.
Yeah, I feel I'm lucky.
Well, listen, I don't want to hold you up too much.
We have had a nice half-hour chat.
Do you feel like you've gotten what you need?
I think I've got enough here for peace, yeah, actually.
I do have the book, and that's usually the most important thing.
And, you know, I really haven't questioned you why, because that's really not... I don't have to do that.
I didn't mean to sound like I don't want the genocide brought up, because, you know, of course... Well, it's essential.
It's essential.
It's absolutely essential.
I know what you're saying as well.
This is not a fictionalized history of the genocide.
It's how it affected a group of people and how it passes itself on and how you can never erase it.
I think that's what we're talking about.
Okay.
Did you ever have any anxieties that this would be a great novel that stayed in somebody's manuscript, in somebody's closet?
Of course I did.
I often wondered throughout 10 years if I would be able to achieve the vision that I had.
And I wasn't going to let it go until...
I thought I had done what I set out to do.
And so I questioned myself, would I be able to finish this book to my own liking?
That was the first mission.
Did you always have the title?
The title came to me about five years in.
And how did that happen?
I was taking a long walk with a friend.
And we were talking about titles.
She's also a writer.
And I was complaining about my lack of title.
And it just came to me.
Have you heard, it's a little early yet because the book is just published, but have you heard anything at all from the various Armenian communities?
No.
I have.
I'm just starting to hear.
I don't know if you know that on Sunday there's going to be a reception and reading for me at the Armenian Library and Museum.
And from what I hear, there's going to be a big crowd of people.
Where is that?
That's in Watertown.
Uh-huh.
But what I've heard, it's been really wonderful, Nick.
I mean, I've just heard such relief and...
excitement about the book and a feeling particularly for the third generation armenian americans but others as well all different generations that finally the story is being told but i've also heard from quite a few readers who are not armenian who have said to me this is my family story you know specifics are different but you know that was my grandmother
That's exactly what happened in our family.
You know, being a Greek.
Yeah, of course.
I'd have to tell you about the similarity and the feelings that Greeks have for Turkish oppressors, right?
Right.
But I actually had a South African journalist interview me, and she said at the beginning of the interview, she said, I've got to tell you this book.
this book could be my life.
These same women are in my family.
And my whole struggle has been to sort of heal the wounds and get on with my own story.
You notice I haven't once asked you the question, but I may as well at this point.
Do you sense any perception on the part of any readers that this could be judged?
A women's novel?
No?
A woman's novel?
You know, because the main characters are women, one might wonder about that.
But I've had great reception from a lot of men.
Well, you've got Bob Stonebler, and he doesn't pass those out.
No, he doesn't.
And Rick Bass and others who've been very excited about the book.
You know, George Loon is a very important character in the book.
Mm-hmm.
This is a guy who's done his work, he's provided for this family, he's loved his wife, and still the marriage breaks down.
And I think his story is... I feel a lot for George Lone.
I think he's a quiet hero in the book.
So I don't know.
I mean, do...
There are men's books and we don't call them men's books.
Of course not, yeah.
I guess in terms of who your central characters are, I guess for a first novel it does make sense to write from the viewpoint of a woman too, I think.
Well, it's the way the story came to me.
Right.
I've written stories from men's point of view.
That hasn't intimidated you at all?
No, no.
Mm-hmm.
Where did you say your other... Now, this is your first novel.
Have you published stories elsewhere?
I published stories when I was in college in very small magazines.
But this is really my first major publication.
That's great.
Yeah.
And what's the first printing, just out of curiosity?
You'll have to ask Random House about that.
I know it's a large printing.
Really?
Uh-huh.
But I don't actually have the number.
Great.
And, of course, it's a little early yet to say how it's doing, I guess.
Well, you know, it's on the San Francisco Chronicle's bestseller list.
For the first two weeks it was in the store.
Wow.
We were all amazed because there hasn't been any publicity out there.
Pat Holt hasn't done anything with it out there yet?
Not yet.
I guess this weekend.
Uh-huh.
She's doing something.
So that was great.
That's terrific.
Yeah.
And we hear it's selling.
It's moving quickly.
Yeah.
That's great.
Well, listen, I enjoyed talking with you.
Oh, yeah, good to talk to you, too.
Please say hello to your husband.
I will.
Remind him of that little story.
In fact, I interviewed him in New York.
It wasn't a telephoner.
As I remember, I think I went to Scribner's and interviewed him there, as I recall.
I think.
Maybe I'm wrong.
But I definitely remember meeting him.
Oh.
Okay.
So I'll make sure you get tear sheets.
Terrific.
That'd be great.
When is it going to come out?
I don't know just yet.
I do have a number of other pieces.
I've done about five interviews this week, and I really do have to shuffle them and see when they're wrong.
Unfortunately, I do one a week.
So where it will fit in the mix, but it'll be within the next three or four weeks.
Okay.
Terrific, Nick.
Good.
Take care.
Thank you.
You too.
Bye-bye.
Starting with tape recorder now, and it's on.
I guess the first question is, how did you come to choose?
I mean, it seems so obvious, but nevertheless, how you came to choose during a life of Louise Collet?
There are two avenues to that, as they're often on in the writing of books.
One is that in my book on Soviet women, I got increasingly interested in the issue of how women had been silenced in different ways throughout the centuries.
I mean, the Soviet women had been silenced by the fact that they were never allowed to organize as women.
They were never allowed to...
they were health problems specific to Soviet women.
They were never allowed to have a feminist movement.
They were just Soviet citizens of the capital C and really sort of de-gendered and their gripes were just completely unheard and also not allowed to be spoken of as particular women's problems, you know.
And that's a point I elaborated at length in my last book.
And I began to be curious about the different ways women have been silenced and
Many years ago, I had re-read a great biography of Flaubert called Flaubert and Madame Bovary by Francis Tegmo, an American writer.
It's a wonderful book.
Oh, it's one of the greatest, still the best biography of Flaubert I think ever done.
And I was... He says some very nice things about your book, incidentally.
Yes, well, I think we have sort of mutual interest.
And I happened to be a friend of the family, a friend of my husband, and I had dinner with him in the early 80s right after, well, right after it finished, you know, for the second time he read his book.
And I said, has anybody ever done a biography of Louis Calais?
And he said, forget it, dear.
all the letters to him were burned.
So I went back and thought, well, they were burned, so that's another project out of the way.
And then in the middle of my Soviet research, I was lying in bed in some flea-ridden hotel in Uzbekistan about me.
And I woke up in the middle of the night in a rage saying, the letters were British.
That's why I have to do the biography.
May I just interject?
In fact, a question I had for you is that statement at the beginning of the book.
It is that scene where you have Flaubert burning the letters with de Maupassant.
And you said, that's the reason I write this book.
And I said, my God, that sounds a little too simplistic.
But apparently that actually is the...
In the wider context of my interest, in the world, within the world.
Let me just say, if the letters existed, would you have written this book?
I think I would have, but I think the thing is that I think 20 other people might have done it as well.
Well, you think those letters really would have been the key to her?
Well, I think one of the keys to her were her journals, which are only recovered in the 1960s or 70s.
I tell that story towards the end of the book of how the journals had been... Exactly, right.
...since 1910.
And I think really without the journals, I don't think one could have done a biography of it.
But with the journals, which I began to look at, they appeared, extracts of them had appeared throughout the 80s in French academic publications.
And I began to look at them, and I thought they were really a gold mine.
for a book on her, because there are a couple of the first drafts of her letters to Philip, but there are also the drafts of her letters to many other men, and it's just a wonderful kind of glimpse, these journals, into the whole kind of social, psychosexual aura of the mid-19th century Paris intelligentsia.
So when I began to research, and I
And I found those journals, and I really knew I had hit a gold mine.
And they were not really classified and not available until accessible, really, until the 1980s when they were placed, you know, classified and so on, and placed in the municipal library of Avenue.
Why did it take that long?
Well, her handwriting is simply appalling.
But I mean, as archival documents, however, they were accessible.
Maybe they were accessible even in the 1970s, but it just took a few years to catalog them, to classify them.
This huge black suitcase full of Calais documents returned from Belgium.
in the late 60s or early 70s.
We don't know exactly that.
I mean, everybody is so old who tells a story.
It can't be, but it must be late 60s, early 70s.
By the time they're catalogued, you know, the French library system is very kind of sleepy.
And by the time they're catalogued and classified and the journals are catalogued by themselves and put on microfilm because they're very fragile and very bad condition so that the microfilming takes some time.
and generally made accessible to the library user.
It's a couple of years.
Sure.
You did all your own translations, too, I know.
Yeah, I did all my own translations, and that I'm grateful to my Russian mother, who never really learned English properly and lived here 49 years, still getting the world news from the Russian, white Russian paper, the Novaya Ruska Slova,
and from the Seattle Palace, so that I haven't lost an ounce of my French.
If you had a choice, clearly you didn't, but if you had a choice between the journals and the letters to Flaubert, which would you choose?
I think I'd choose the letters.
You would?
The journals are awfully good.
They cover more of a period of her life, though, don't they?
Well, not necessarily.
She started writing the journals in about 43, 44, and there are many years that are missing.
There are no journal entries for 46 years.
They're very, those journals are fairly sports, and what's really fascinating, but they're fairly sports, and they skip whole years.
We suspect that a lot was just lost.
And so they don't start early enough in time to give her a glimpse of her youth or anything.
Sure.
And they stop in about 54 or 55.
Therefore, they cover not too large a period of a life than the letters to Flaubert would have.
And of course, now the letters to Flaubert would have covered about eight years, right?
About eight years.
What do you fear was lost in those letters?
Well, one was lost in those letters.
I mean, beyond the fact that there would be an extraordinary archive, and it would be the other side of the correspondence, of course.
But I mean, in terms of the essence of this woman, I guess, is what I'm asking.
Well, I think there are several things I miss.
One, her wonderfully inflammable temper.
I mean, I love it when she loses the temper.
She's very irascible.
I wouldn't want her as a friend, by the way.
I'd like to have been a member of this panel.
That would have been wonderful, wouldn't it?
Yeah, yeah.
Because it was really a very interesting salon.
But I'm not sure I would have wanted her as a friend.
And she was kind of a needy narcissist, you know, those women of bad news.
But the men certainly found her irresistible, didn't they?
Many of them did.
And I think that what I would have missed the most
what I miss the most, what I would have most looked long for in her letters to Fleur, several things.
One is that flair of temper, which I find is very interesting.
And when she gets angry, the language gets so kind of heated up and pungent, like those letters to that deputy, you know, who was sickle and had venereal disease, whatever.
I mean, the letters to him have a wonderful kind of
tautness and chutzpah and, you know, energy, the energy of anger.
I would have missed that.
I would have missed the whole kind of commentary on the social scene in Paris, which she gives so well to Hugo in those letters of 54, 55, 56.
Those letters are just wonderful.
I mean, the whole commentary on the court of Napoleon in the suit.
so that she was always documenting the scene, who she saw at the opera, who she saw such or that for, what people said to each other.
And it's just one more glimpse into a second period of French literature.
And then I would have also missed, I would have loved to have seen how she reacted to what he told her
was the shape of his book.
That's the stuff that would really fascinate me, I think, too.
That's what would fascinate me maybe the most, is to what degree did he... Participate in the creative process, I guess.
Exactly.
Because actually, that's what I miss the most.
Because certainly he is documenting the progress of the book in such detail to her that...
You can't help but miss what she would have, what kind of advice, you know, what kind of input she would have given him.
When you began the project, were you very, I mean, that familiar with, I mean, she won the Academy Francis, what, four times for her poetry?
Were you that familiar with her work?
No, I wasn't.
Very few of us are because...
They're not, you know, they're all out of print.
You have to look them up in libraries.
Somehow the name had come through to me over a decade ago, even before that last encounter with Stigmore and before that last particular rereading of his work.
I think it had somehow in the 70s, I came across her in some history of French feminism or something, as being the first woman to make a living
completely by her pen.
She was, in fact, a woman of letters.
She was a woman of letters, and she made, I think the woman who was of that claim to fame in British literature is a woman called Afra Ben, late 17th century, early 18th century writer, who is always said to be the first woman to support herself completely by her pen.
Well, Louise certainly had to.
I mean, she was a single mother, and she was supporting her kids solely through her writings, and it's a very contemporary
flavor to all her anguishes about how was she going to do with a single mother and how was she going to do with a single, you know, breadwinner.
I think very significant you point out.
Unlike George Sand, you know, she kept the woman's name.
I mean, she didn't... She did.
She did.
And also, those other women who were writing the timing, if you take Sand and Marie Dagoo, that lover of lists whom I mentioned,
All these women came from the aristocracy and were kind of protected by the fact that they came from the aristocracy.
This is a very interesting comment on the elitism of the French ethos.
When Barbet de Réveilly made those vast attacks on her in the book that came out in 1882 called The Blue Stockings, he
I denied that she had ever come from an old gentry family.
She said she was born into a family of Marseille fishmongers and talked like that.
That is a very interesting thing.
Why should he demote her?
And then this example followed and everybody was saying she didn't even come from the gentry.
She came from some little merchant family in Marseille.
They were aping the big critics' words who had invented it just out of whole cloth as a way of demoting her because
She cared very much for her ancestry, for these distinguished members of the Promo South Parliament, for the grandfather who had fought to have been a leader of the revolution and had a great Christian library and was a kind of, you know, a country gentleman.
And by demoting her social status, they found that she was all the more vulnerable to attack.
That is vicious, but very, very significant to the illegitimate of the French system.
Do you see what I mean?
denying her even a noble or gentile birth.
To get back to her writing, obviously, since you began the project, you've read her work.
How do you judge her?
How does she stand up as a poet?
Well, she doesn't stand up that well, but I think she's absolutely parallel to the kind of art that was being rewarded
in the kind of visual art that was being rewarded in the salons of the, I mean the salons, the yearly exhibition of painting, not literary, social salons.
In the salons, they always happen in May, so it's called Salon de May, of the visual arts, which rewarded, punctually rewarded every year, the most kitschy kind of sentimental realism
It was not, you know, it was not a time for prophetic art yet.
I mean, Courbet was already painting, but was poor as a church mouse and was scoffed at.
And the people who were being rewarded, people that you will never hear of again, like, well, Pradier himself, her friend James Pradier, at whose studio she met Robert, has done a lot of huge key-tip 90th-century sculptures that still stands in Paris.
And he was considered the greatest friend sculptor.
What I'm saying is that it was a time of very bad taste.
Sometimes I think bad taste was invented in the 1860s, you know, with the sort of mass media that came before then.
Would she be of interest to you if she were not the muse to Flaubert?
I don't think she... I'm not sure she would have... Maybe not to a general reading public, but how about to you?
She would still be of interest... I mean, if she had been deprived of oral boyfriends... Well, let's just take Flaubert out of the equation.
Everything else remaining equal, the same.
I'm not sure.
I mean, I've got to be very honest with you.
I'm not sure she would have left all those books behind.
I'm not sure that the books would have been commented.
I'm not sure that they even would have survived.
Because of the fact that she was Flaubert's... And Madame Bovary, of course, beyond that.
And he models of Madame Bovary.
Every ten years at the anniversary of her death, there was a spate of articles on her throughout the full French press.
And then the 50th anniversary came along, it was 1926.
And there was a huge bit of art all over, you know.
This is the 50th anniversary of the death of Madame Calais, blah, blah, blah, blah.
And the focus is always on Flaubert.
And then they print some new letter of his from Bouyer to him or from Bouyer concerning her or something like that.
I'm not sure that she would even have been commented that much if she...
had just been his subject.
And I fear, but I mean, I accept the fact that one has to, you know, it's by one, you know, you get two.
I mean, you go into Flaubert's life and you get Flaubert in the bargain, which is a huge thing.
You can't study Flaubert properly without studying Flaubert well also, because
And that's what people failed to do for decades.
They had this really vicious and very unfair, totally undocumented take on her, which I think all this got corrected curiously when Flaubert studies fell into Anglo-American hands.
I think they began to do it much better.
I think the tradition of misogyny in France is just far worse and far deeper than anything we suffered from in the Anglo-American.
What was your attitude regarding Flaubert before you began the project and now what is it afterwards?
I've had to read him so carefully.
That if anything, my esteem for genius is even greater.
Really?
Yeah.
I don't quote other reviews in my pieces, but I know the Times piece was very critical of your estimation.
Oh, well, I mean, Michiko, I mean, the thing is that, you know, I think she's attacking for the sake of attacking at this point.
I mean, I don't mind being quoted by that because eight days later she ran an really unjustified attack on Janet Malcolm.
on the book on Sylvia Plath.
Did you read that?
I did.
Well, I mean, it was forward.
I mean, it was just impossible.
A few weeks before, she'd attacked Updike's Brazil in ways that, I mean, one might like or not like the book, but there's no reason for that kind of...
Viciousness of attack.
Well, it did seem a bit personal, didn't it?
All these attacks were very personal.
Actually, the one on me was the least personal of the three attacks, but then she's been attacking left and right, and I think it's a principle of attack she's answered that I don't really pay attention to.
Okay.
But she's the only one who said that I'm trying to diminish him.
Well, I have to say, I read the review before I read the book.
And the book is not what I expected from having read the review.
I can cite at least ten instances where you aren't qualified and you're praised for him as a writer.
Well, yes.
And I think over the bunch of most reviews that the biography is
is measured because I don't make any great claims for her talent and also because I don't ever try to diminish
And I think I very carefully questioned you about this earlier, where I asked you to evaluate the woman as a, Louise, as a writer, and I think you basically said she'd be forgotten today if it weren't for her relationship with Flaubert.
So, I mean, you're being consistent with this all along.
I think I am, and I think I have to be honest.
I have to be honest and say I think she would have been, she might well have been forgotten.
And similarly, you aren't dismissing Flaubert as a writer of consequence either, I don't think.
Not in the least bit.
As she suggests in her review, I think she suggests that you do that.
No, she suggests that I diminish Flaubert.
That's what I'm saying.
She suggests that you, Michiko makes that suggestion in her review, I think.
But it's silly because what she's alleging is that by perhaps focusing on the more unattractive traits of his character, I'm diminishing him as a writer as if there was ever any connection between character and talent or character and genius.
I mean, aren't we all used to the idea that geniuses can be off and off vicious and extremely odious people?
I mean, from...
If you look at Baudelaire or certain aspects of Dickens' character were pretty ghastly also, and all through the history of arts and letters.
We've got great Jesus' behaving atrociously towards each other.
And so to point out his misogyny, or always sort of praising his devotion to his male friends and his loyalty to his male friends, which is already a great quality,
It has nothing to do with my estimation of him as a writer.
It's a very primitive association which alleges that if I diminish him in any way or if I cast any slight on his character, I am diminishing him.
my summation of his talent, which is actually crazy.
And I think it's clear also that you never began this work as a work of literary criticism either.
I mean, the point here is not to discuss Madame Bovary as a literary work.
I mean, that's established.
You're doing something else quite aside from that.
It is amazing how much material you were able to find, though, I mean, in the various libraries in France.
I mean, did you think that you would be able to penetrate this woman as much as you were able to do?
Well, I felt, as soon as I was exposed to the journals, and as soon as I read through the letters, the letters,
In the new edition, another reason why it would have been very dull to try this book, to do this book, earlier than, let's say, the late 70s, is that the first unexplicated edition of Flaubert's letters came out.
And in that play yard edition that they put all the French breaks in, it was heavily censored.
I mean, there were no dirty words, either in his letters to her or in his letters to his buddies.
all those descriptions, you know, the brothel scene or the bordello scenes and the low descriptions of the lovemaking with the hordes and so on.
None of that existed.
None of that.
And the whole bordello scene, the whole prostitution scene is very important in this day relation because he was treating her in a way she felt like a prostitute.
And these new women, these newly liberated women or women who were striving for a new degree of
self-wrought liberation, had this terrible hang-up that they, in this process, they might be mistaken for prostitutes.
Do you know what I mean?
Mm-hmm.
And that was a, that's a recurring refrain in her, in her recurring sex, in her letters to him, or her notes to him, or her reactions, obviously.
It's, who do you think I am?
I mean, you're not treating me like a lady.
Why can't I have a cup of tea with your mom, you know?
Mm-hmm.
I had forgotten that he was a syphilitic, too, and all the mercury he took for his... I'm amazed she stayed with him as long as she did, to tell you the truth.
Let's see.
Obviously, I haven't asked you about the book.
The book takes care of itself.
We're just kind of getting some things here.
Is this a book of anger?
I mean, is this a book, are you an angry woman when you're writing this book?
No, I think I'm a compassionate woman.
I think I'm reflecting on, I really enjoy reflecting on our forerunners, on those women who just even, even just a little, if they only blazed a tiny bit of a path or tried to blaze a tiny bit of a path,
to trace all the reasons why it was so difficult for them.
So that we might both, as women, contemporary women, that we might both be grateful for the little we have, or maybe the lot we have, depending on how you view it, and aware of how earlier women went about getting the freedom that
you know, they were beginning to, whose rewards were beginning to reach.
I think that was really the main thrust of my search, is to find parallels and paradoxes in the female condition, to deepen my sense of parallels and paradoxes in the female condition.
What do you think she expected from the relationship with Flaubert?
Well, I think she was very much of a bourgeois lady.
She wanted to marry him.
I mean, I think one of the contradictions of her character that with all the rebelliousness and all the left-wing pamphleteering and sloganeering, she was in part a very bourgeois, decorous lady.
And she wanted that stable relationship.
She wanted to be treated like a lady of her birth.
And I think that that's what threw him so off balance.
As a result, he didn't know how to treat her.
His refusal to let her into the house, into his mother's house, is an important act of great confusion.
He's thrown off balance by her because...
He doesn't know what she is.
She's a new kind of woman.
He's kind of a sitting duck for Freudians, isn't he, though?
Well, I think another interesting aspect of the book is that maybe he's one of the last two generations or so of writers who have not read Freud.
And, I mean...